Stat for Social Good - Canner
================
Judith Canner
6/8/2021

## Consulting and Service Learning

Service Learning has been a cornerstone of all degree programs at
California State University, Monterey Bay since its inception in 1994.
Service learning is experience-based learning, where the student takes
an active role in an experience or project that benefits the community
while also deepening their own understanding of a particular curriculum.
Our course, Service Learning for Mathematics and Statistics Consultants,
began in 2013 at the request of mathematics majors who wished to engage
in service that prepared them for careers other than teaching. We
developed the course so that students engage with the question “How can
mathematicians and statisticians contribute to furthering social justice
and equity through their profession?” Since it began, our 5-unit course
has averaged 14 students each spring semester. Students are expected to
have completed, at minimum, an introductory level statistics course.
Most students are in their third year as Statistics and Mathematics
majors at the point they enroll in the course. Our course is designed to
meet the major learning outcome: Students demonstrate ethical reasoning,
global awareness, and civic and intercultural engagement through
statistical practice in ways that promote sustainability, and social
justice and equity across diverse communities. The course-specific
learning outcomes expect that at the end of this course, students will
be able to

1.  Explain the relationship between their social and cultural
    identities and their identity as a mathematics or statistics
    professional.  
2.  Identify and address the social inequities created by applications
    of mathematical and statistical methods.  
3.  Describe the professional responsibility of mathematicians and
    statisticians to promote social justice and equity.  
4.  Follow the statistical investigative process to collect, manipulate,
    and explore data, and analyze and conduct inference to address the
    need of a community partner.  
5.  Demonstrate ethics in statistical practice and communication through
    community-based projects.  
6.  Communicate with clients effectively and respectfully while
    considering the dynamics of power, privilege, knowledge of the
    community and its history.  
7.  Apply mathematical and statistical methods to expose social
    injustices, propose solutions, and take action to initiate change.

The course is structured around two main components: 1) the service
learning project where students consult with local nonprofits and
schools on data collection and analysis projects for a minimum of 30
hours, and 2) the classroom discussions. The service learning component
is discussed in more detail in Unfried and Canner (2019), as are some of
the details related to classroom discussions, so here I will focus on
some more recent additions to the classroom components of the course.

Our classroom discussions focus on issues related to social justice and
equity as it pertains to the ways statistics and algorithms impact
communities and individuals. We build our classroom discussions, in
part, around the topics addressed in Cathy O’Neil’s book, Weapons of
Math Destruction (2016). Students read a chapter each week, write a
reflective journal, and then engage in class discussions on topics such
as targeted-ads, insurance rates, and predictive policing. The book is
beginning to show its age, though the general themes are still relevant.
The book also focuses on the destructive aspects of statistics and data
science. Therefore, we supplement the book with additional readings,
podcasts, and videos to update students on the topics or to address data
for good topics. Most of the students have never before engaged in
discussions about social justice or equity in the context of mathematics
and statistics, therefore we must create a framework for our discussions
early and reinforce it often to ensure productive conversations. The
LARA (Listen, Affirm, Respond, Add/Ask) method provides a framework for
discussions to create space for differing perspectives while reinforcing
similar viewpoints (Zomorodi, 2014). The method is practical to prepare
students for both classroom conversations and client conversations in
the service learning projects. It is important to reinforce LARA and
model it as an instructor throughout the course to ensure students feel
comfortable sharing their views. It is also important, especially as an
instructor from a privileged background, to approach each discussion and
topic with cultural humility - giving voice to the students rather than
imparting personal views.

We provide an opportunity for students to address topics of social
justice and equity of interest through mini TED Talks. Students choose a
topic of interest and present a data supported 5 minute presentation to
the class, followed by a class discussion on the topic. The details of
the assignment implementation are included in Unfried and Canner (2019),
but a new addition to the project is a plan for civic action. We want to
empower students to take action in different ways. Our first attempt at
a plan for civic action was a simple assignment - write a letter,
reinforced with the research they completed for the talk, to a person or
organization in a position of power to enact change related to their TED
Talk topic. Students wrote letters to politicians, community leaders,
and industry leaders to ask them to consider how their decisions,
policies, or businesses impacted various communities or contributed to
systemic racism or exclusion. The impact of such action is difficult to
measure, but the experience allows students to take personal action even
if it does not yield immediate, or even positive, results. We look
forward to how we might evolve the role of personal civic action in our
course in the future.

For many of our students, our course is the first time they have
confronted the fact that mathematics and statistics are not neutral. In
the course, they begin to evaluate their social and professional
responsibilities, regardless of future profession, and we culminate our
discussions with the creation of a Hippocratic Oath” as statisticians,
mathematicians, and data scientists. Though we have kept the structure
of the course consistent the last few years, the conversations continue
to evolve as students bring their experiences and backgrounds to the
discussion.

### References

Alana Unfried & Judith Canner (2019) Doing Social Justice: Turning Talk
into Action in a Mathematics Service Learning Course, PRIMUS, 29:3-4,
210-227, DOI: 10.1080/10511970.2018.1510862

*Note: we are happy to share our course materials upon request
<jcanner@csumb.edu>*

O-Neil, Cathy (2016). Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data
Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy Crown ISBN 13:
978-0553418811

Zomorodi, M. 2014. Your Facebook friend said something racist. Now What?
<https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/notetoself/episodes/your-facebook-friend-said-something-racist-now-what>.
Accessed 8 June 2021.
